RFC: Improve saved object migrations (#66056)
elastic/kibana: rfcs/text/0013_saved_object_migrations.md

      it will be pointing to a read-only index which prevent writes from
      6.8+ releases which are already online.
</details>

## 4.5 Changes in 8.0
1. Re-use the same index for minor upgrades.
2. Only allow breaking field mapping changes (which requires creating a new
   index) in a major.
3. All update operations should use optimistic concurrency control.

### Migration algorithm (8.0):

1. On startup, find the index to which the `.kibana` alias points,
   `.kibana_n`, and check if any documents have an outdated `migrationVersion`
   indicating that a migration needs to be performed.
2. If there are documents with newer `migrationVersion` numbers, exit Kibana
   with a fatal error.
3. If there are outdated documents, migrate these in batches:
   1. Read a batch of outdated documents from `.kibana_n`.
   2. Transform documents by applying the migration functions.
   3. Update the document batch in the same index using optimistic concurrency
      control. 
   4. If a batch fails due to an update version mismatch, repeat the entire
      process.
4. Once all documents are up to date, the migration is complete and Kibana can
   start serving traffic.

> Advantages:

Reviewer: Wanted to add something here, since we just hit it with a customer.

- Avoids an issue where Kibana can not start due to being unable to create a new index. An example of this is when the cluster is over [cluster.max_shards_per_node](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/modules-cluster.html#cluster-shard-limit)

Author: Added in 39ec98c

 - Server logs from failed migrations.

**Assumptions and tradeoffs:**
1. The simplicity of idempotent, coordination-free migrations outweighs the
   restrictions this will impose on the kinds of migrations we're able to
   support in the future. See (4.3.1)
2. Maintaining the upgrade behaviour and rollback procedures of previous
   Kibana 7.x releases is more important than introducing enhancements like:
   1. (2.6) _mixed Kibana versions shouldn't cause data loss_.
   2. In-place migrations to support > 10k saved objects, reduce the downtime
      window, and slightly improve the reliability. See (4.5.1)
3. For 8.x, in-place migrations to support > 10k saved objects, reduce the
   downtime window, and slightly improve the reliability is more important
   than (2.7) _maintain read-only functionality during the downtime
   window_. See (4.5.1).

## 4.1 Discover and remedy potential failures before any downtime

> Achieves goals: (2.3)
> Mitigates errors: (3.1), (3.2)

1. Introduce a CLI option to perform a dry run migration to allow
   administrators to locate and fix potential migration failures without

>    taking their existing Kibana node(s) offline.

Author: Once the dry run is complete, we will "cleanup" by deleting any migrated documents and indices created to perform the dry run, so the migrated documents won't be accessible, only the documents that failed.

   invalid object exception which should include a link to the documentation
   to help administrators resolve migration bugs.
5. Educate Kibana developers to no longer simply write back an unmigrated
   document if an exception occurred. A migration function should either
   successfully transform the object or throw. 

## 4.3 Automatically retry failed migrations until they succeed

> Achieves goals: (2.2)
> Mitigates errors (3.3) and (3.4)

External conditions such as failures from an unhealthy Elasticsearch cluster
(3.3) can cause the migration to fail. The Kibana cluster should be able to
recover automatically once these external conditions are resolved. There are
two broad approaches to solving this problem based on whether or not
migrations are idempotent: 

| Idempotent migrations |Description                                                      |
| --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Yes                   | 3.3.1 Idempotent migrations performed without coordination      |
| No                    | 3.3.2 Single node migrations coordinated through a lease / lock |

> Because idempotent migrations don't require coordination, solution (3.3.1) is

Reviewer 2: nit: (I think)
```suggestion
Because idempotent migrations don't require coordination, solution (4.3.1) is
```

## 4.3.1 Idempotent migrations performed without coordination

The migration system can be said to be idempotent if the same results are
produced whether the migration was run once or multiple times. This property
should hold even if new (up to date) writes occur in between migration runs
which introduces the following restrictions:

### 4.3.1.1 Restrictions

1. All document transforms need to be deterministic, that is a document
   transform will always return the same result for the same set of inputs. 
2. It should always be possible to construct the exact set of inputs required
   for (1) at any point during the migration process (before, during, after). 

### 4.3.1.2 Algorithm

1. On startup, find the index to which the `.kibana` alias points,
   `.kibana_n`, and check if any documents have an outdated `migrationVersion`
   indicating that a migration needs to be performed. 
2. Create `.kibana_n+1`, if it already exists, ignore the error and continue.
3. Migrate documents by reading from `.kibana_n` and creating documents in
   `.kibana_n+1`. If a document already exists, ignore.
4. Move the `.kibana` index to point to `.kibana_n+1` (ignore if it has
   already been moved). 

> Together with the limitations this algorithm ensures that migrations are

Author: I'm not sure how easy it is to create a thorough lint rule since it's not just side-effects like `fetch` or `fs` API's. A migration can be non-idempotent by introducing a random value too (like the spaces migration setting a document's id to `new uuid.v4()`)

I don't think we can create an automated test for this since it's hard to supply the right input document, but plugin's can test their migrations by running the migration on all the expected input shapes and asserting that the output matches a snapshot. If the same input generates the same output for all valid inputs it's safe.

Yeah that should be possible, we could either adopt a naming convention like `dashboard.migrations.ts` and apply linting based on the file name, or perform linting on the registered migration function itself (this won't lint code located in a function call). Neither would be a perfect guarantee.

> Together with the limitations this algorithm ensures that migrations are

Reviewer 3: In java, we were asserting that migrations were idempotent by creating a large set of 'random' input objects using reflection and checking if the result was always the same when running the migration multiple times for each object. I wasn't really a fan of the approach but I have to admit this was working surprisingly well. This is probably not a realistic approach for JS though (even if `SavedObjectMigrationFn` now allows to type the input/output properties), so I guess delegating that testing to migration owners is probably our only option.

> Together with the limitations this algorithm ensures that migrations are

Reviewer 2: > This is probably not a realistic approach for JS though

Yeah I think it would be hard, mostly b/c of the number of `string` fields we have that are really JSON. We could provide utilities for generating this data though?

idempotent. If two nodes are started simultaneously, both of them will start
writing into `.kibana_n+1` but because migrations are idempotent, it doesn’t
matter which node’s writes win.

> Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to
> perform a migration at the same time. E.g. if a v7.8.0 and a v7.9.0 node
> attempts to simultaneously migrate a 7.6.0 index the result will be an
> inconsistent state. This is an unlikely scenario in practise and therefore
> an acceptable limitation. In 8.x we can ensure that only the latest node
> completes the migration.

> ## 4.3.2 Single node migrations coordinated through a lease/lock

Reviewer 2: This RFC should be making a strong proposal. If we're not planning to go down this route, I think this should moved to the "alternatives" section of the RFC along with a clear reason we are not opting for this option. I was a bit confused when first reading this and thought maybe this RFC was proposing we do both until I read the fine print at the top of 4.3

Author: Makes sense, I've moved it into the alternatives section.

  Elasticsearch our locking mechanism needs to be based on a document.
- Manually removing the lock
  - shouldn't have any risk of accidentally causing data loss.
  - can be done with a single command that's always the same (shouldn’t
    require trying to find `n` for removing the correct `.kibana_n` index).
- Must be easy to retrieve the lock/cluster state to aid in debugging or to
  provide visibility. 

Algorithm:
1. Node reads `kibana_cluster_state` lease document from `.kibana`
2. It sends a heartbeat every `heartbeat_interval` seconds by sending an
   update operation that adds it’s UUID to the `nodes` array and sets the
   `lastSeen` value to the current local node time. If the update fails due to
   a version conflict the update operation is retried after a random delay by
   fetching the document again and attempting the update operation once more.
3. To obtain a lease, a node:
    1. Fetches the `kibana_cluster_state` document
    2. If all the nodes’ `hasLock === false` it sets it’s own `hasLock` to
       true and attempts to write the document. If the update fails
       (presumably because of another node’s heartbeat update) it restarts the

>        process from (3)(a)

Author: Yes, I'll fix the numbering.

means other nodes can take up to `2*expiry_timeout` to recognize an expired
lease, but a lease will never expire prematurely. 

Any node that detects an expired lease can release that lease by setting the
expired node’s `hasLease = false`. It can then attempt to acquire its lease. 

## 4.4 Minimize data loss with mixed Kibana versions
When multiple versions of Kibana are running at the same time, writes from the
outdated node can end up either in the outdated Kibana index, the newly
migrated index, or both. New documents added (and some updates) into the old
index while a migration is in-progress will be lost. Writes that end up in the
new index will be in an outdated format. This could cause queries on the data
to only return a subset of the results which leads to incorrect results or
silent data loss.

Any in-progress writes such as a bulk operation will continue to run even
after an index was set to read-only or an alias had been removed. There are
also certain failure scenarios under which ClusterState (such as aliases or
index settings) remains inconsistent between nodes for an unbounded
amount of time. Since Kibana cannot rely on Elasticsearch scripting support

> being enabled, we don't have a mechanism to guarantee that there would be no

Reviewer 2: > Since Kibana cannot rely on Elasticsearch scripting support being enabled

How significantly better could we make this if we could require painless to be enabled on the `.kibana` index? If that is an option that gives us leverage, we should discuss making that a requirement in 8.0

Author: I should maybe remove or reword this since it suggests that scripting could fix this problem. We could use scripting to add additional protection but it still won't guarantee no data loss.

With scripts enabled we could turn all updates into scripted updates that only update a document if the migration version hasn't been incremented. Whereas the write alias strategy for 8.x cannot prevent existing bulk operations from succeeding, this would provide a guarantee even for in-flight bulk updates. However, we cannot do the same for create operations. If we continuously polled and migrated outdated documents we could migrate created outdated documents, but there would still be a period of time where a query on the index would return inconsistent results.

At the end of the day it feels like if we can't tell users "your data is 100% safe with mixed kibana versions" then the amount of effort we spend on plugging the gaps has much less value.

Reviewer 2: > At the end of the day it feels like if we can't tell users "your data is 100% safe with mixed kibana versions" then the amount of effort we spend on plugging the gaps has much less value.

100% agree, there are diminishing returns on this. Basically I see a lot of value in not having any problems 95% of the time, and even more value in 100% of the time, but not much of a difference between 95% and 99%. So I agree if we can't guarantee it, then it's most likely not worth the effort.

data loss. Instead, we aim to minimize it as much as possible.

> To minimize data loss we need to implement a “guard” which will prevent old

Author: Yes, you can think of it as the most current version of Kibana obtaining a write lock until a newer Kibana node is started up and again locks out all older nodes. And here we implement it by setting the outdated index to read-only.

nodes and new nodes from writing at the same time. To perform a rollback for a
failed migration, this guard will have to be removed. By locating this state
in the backup snapshot taken before an upgrade, rolling back to the previous
snapshot will automatically remove the guard.

**7.x Minimize data loss when creating new indices**

Preventing data loss from mixed 7.x versions, introduces two additional steps
to rollback to a previous version without a snapshot:
1. (existing) Point the `.kibana` alias to the previous Kibana index `.kibana_n-1`
2. (existing) Delete `.kibana_n`
3. (new) Enable writes on `.kibana_n-1`
4. (new) Delete the dummy "version lock" document from `.kibana_n-1`

Since our documentation and server logs have implicitly encouraged users to
rollback without using snapshots, many users might have to rely on these
additional migration steps to perform a rollback. Since even the existing
steps are error prone, introducing more steps will likely introduce more

> problems than what it solves.

Reviewer 2: Are you stating that algo below is something we shouldn't do?

Author: Yes. I could maybe move this to alternatives as well to make it clearer.

Author: I moved the 7.x algorithm to the alternatives section and put the other paragraphs with the 8.x algorithm for preventing data loss with mixed versions.

<details>
  <summary><s>Minimize data loss with mixed 7.x versions</s></summary>
  
  1. All future versions of Kibana 7.x will use the `.kibana_saved_objects`
   alias to locate the current index. If `.kibana_saved_objects` doesn't

>    exist, newer versions will fallback to reading `.kibana`.

Reviewer 2: Am I correct in understanding that this fallback behavior only applicable to the migration window? If it happens also after migrations, we probably have a decent amount of code in Kibana that will break (anything that uses an ES client to access `.kibana` directly).

Author: Migrations will fallback to reading data out of `.kibana` during the migration window. But this does introduce a breaking change to how we interact with kibana's data, once started up all reads and writes should go to the concrete index to which `.kibana_saved_objects` pointed to at startup time. `.kibana` will point to an outdated read-only index so any writes here will fail. So we will have to be sure that all code that writes to `.kibana` today is also updated.

Reviewer 2: > So we will have to be sure that all code that writes to `.kibana` today is also updated.

This sounds like potentially a lot of work. I hope I am wrong 😄 Maybe we can hack this within the `ElasticsearchService`?

Author: I didn't do a thorough audit, but I think the only places where we read directly from `.kibana` is when collecting some metrics. Plugins should use `kibana.index` config setting so we should be able to trace any usages.

  2. All future versions of Kibana will locate the index that
     `.kibana_saved_objects` points to and then read and write directly from
     the _index_ instead of the alias.
  3. Before starting a migration:
    1. Write a new dummy "version lock" document to the `.kibana` index with a
      `migrationVersion` set to the current version of Kibana. If an outdated
      node is started up after a migration was started it will detect that
      newer documents are present in the index and refuse to start up.
    2. Set the outdated index to read-only. Since `.kibana` is never advanced,
      it will be pointing to a read-only index which prevent writes from
      6.8+ releases which are already online.
</details>

## 4.5 Changes in 8.0

> 1. Migrations will be in-place and re-use the same index for minor upgrades.

Reviewer 4: for upgrades in minor and patch releases?

Author: Yes, will clarify.

   3. Update the document batch in the same index using optimistic concurrency
      control. 
   4. If a batch fails due to an update version mismatch, repeat the entire
      process.
4. Once all documents are up to date, the migration is complete and Kibana can
   start serving traffic.

Advantages:
- Not duplicating all documents into a new index will speed up migrations and
  reduce the downtime window. This will be especially important for the future
  requirement to support > 10k or > 100k documents.
- We can check the health of an existing index before starting the migration,
  but we cannot detect what kind of failures might occur while creating a new
  index. Whereas retrying migrations will eventually recover from the errors
  in (3.3), re-using an index allows us to detect these problems before trying
  and avoid errors like (3.3.1) altogether.
- Single index to backup instead of “index pattern” that matches any
  `.kibana_n`.
- Simplifies Kibana system index Elasticsearch plugin since it needs to work
  on one index per "tenant".
- Can prevent data loss when mixed versions of Kibana are both attempting a
  migration using optimistic concurrency control.

Drawbacks:

> - Cannot make breaking mapping changes (even though it was possible we never
>   introduced a breaking mapping change during 7.x).

Reviewer 2: nit for clarity
```suggestion
- Cannot make breaking mapping changes (even though it was possible, we have not
  introduced a breaking mapping change during 7.x).
```

- Rollback is only possible by restoring a snapshot which requires educating
  users to ensure that they don't rely on `.kibana_n` indices as backups.
  (Apart from the need to educate users, snapshot restores provide many

>   benefits).

Reviewer 2: Should we add some failsafe CLI option here?

For example, in 8.0 we could have an interactive prompt on the CLI that asks "Have you made a snapshot prior to upgrade? (y/N)" and also provide a CLI option to skip this check for automated upgrades (eg `--skip-upgrade-snapshot-check`).

This could be a forcing function to make admins at least think about this before running an upgrade.

Author: Adding an accompanying config option might make it easier to bypass in some environments like a pre-built docker image.

Though I'm a bit hesitant about the impact this might have, it could increase downtime when Kibana gets upgraded and an administrator doesn't immediately realise this prompt.

Reviewer 2: > Though I'm a bit hesitant about the impact this might have, it could increase downtime when Kibana gets upgraded and an administrator doesn't immediately realise this prompt.

At the very least, this change would need to be in a major upgrade. It's also not a common pattern and I agree it may create more problems than it solves (though data loss is very difficult to come back from).

Alternatively, maybe we should consider asking users to define a snapshot repository that Kibana should use for upgrade backups. If we have a snapshot repository in place, we can automatically trigger snapshot backups before upgrades. If there is none configured, we can at least emit a warning during server start up.

In the future, we could even walk the user through the process of setting up an SLM policy for Kibana.

Author: I like this kind of automation, this is something we could do on Cloud, but the Kibana nodes don't know which one first started the migration, so they all need to take a snapshot. Finding 3 upgrade backup snapshots could be confusing.

We could inspect all the snapshot repositories and ensure that there's a recent snapshot of all kibana's indexes, if not we can print a warning.

Reviewer 2: > We could inspect all the snapshot repositories and ensure that there's a recent snapshot of all kibana's indexes, if not we can print a warning.

Sounds like a good option 👍. We could also have opt-in behavior for bailing upgrades if no recent snapshots have been taken. I know the implicit backup we had before wasn't really a feature, but I want to make sure we don't lead customers down a path that could lead to data loss without an escape hatch.

- It narrows the second restriction under (4.3.1) even further: migrations
  cannot rely on any state that could change as part of a migration because we
  can no longer use the previous index as a snapshot of unmigrated state.

> - We can’t automatically recover from a half-way done migration.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand this limitation. Why would a migration that failed half way not be able to be completed? Wouldn't this limitation eliminate the possibility of automated retries? (the primary source of support cases)

Author: The wording here is misleading (I'll fix it), the drawback is that we can't automatically rollback from a failed migration. So once you start you either need a snapshot or find a way to get the migration to complete successfully.

- It’s impossible to provide read-only functionality for outdated nodes which
  means we can't achieve goal (2.7).

### 4.5.2 Minimizing data loss (8.0)
See [4.4 Minimize data loss with mixed Kibana
versions](#44-minimize-data-loss-with-mixed-kibana-versions) for a background
discussion around minimizing data loss.

1. Disable `action.auto_create_index` for the Kibana system indices.
2. If a node detects that the `.kibana` index requires a migration it does the
   following:

>    1. Create a version-specific read and write alias for sending commands

Reviewer 4: Do use it together with `1. Migrations will be in-place and re-use the same index for minor upgrades.`?

Author: The index is re-used, but not the alias. So the data always stays in `.kibana` but we send read or write commands to the alias which (if the alias exists) sends these commands to the `.kibana` index.

   1. (2.6) _mixed Kibana versions shouldn't cause data loss_.
   2. In-place migrations to support > 10k saved objects, reduce the downtime
      window, and slightly improve the reliability. See (4.5.1)
3. For 8.x, in-place migrations to support > 10k saved objects, reduce the
   downtime window, and slightly improve the reliability is more important
   than (2.7) _maintain read-only functionality during the downtime
   window_. See (4.5.1).

## 4.1 Discover and remedy potential failures before any downtime

> Achieves goals: (2.3)
> Mitigates errors: (3.1), (3.2)

1. Introduce a CLI option to perform a dry run migration to allow
   administrators to locate and fix potential migration failures without
   taking their existing Kibana node(s) offline.
2. To have the highest chance of surfacing potential failures such as low disk
   space, dry run migrations should not be mere simulations. A dry run should
   perform a real migration in a way that doesn’t impact the existing Kibana
   cluster.
3. The CLI should generate a migration report to make it easy to create a
   support request from a failed migration dry run.

>     1. The report would be an NDJSON export of all failed objects.

Author: I'm imagining two types of dry run result. "dry run completed with invalid / corrupt objects" or "dry run failed due to an unexpected error: [insert cluster-related errors from 3.3 here]". So if you have cluster errors, you need to fix your cluster and retry until the dry run completes. Only if it completes will it generate an invalid/corrupt saved objects report.

    2. If support receives such a report, we could modify all the objects to
       ensure the migration would pass and send this back to the client.
    3. The client can then import the updated objects using the standard Saved
       Objects NDJSON import and run another dry run to verify all problems
       have been fixed.
4. Make running dry run migrations a required step in the upgrade procedure
   documentation.
5. (Optional) Add dry run migrations to the standard cloud upgrade procedure?

## 4.2 Tag objects as “invalid” if their transformation fails

> Achieves goals: (2.2)
> Mitigates Errors (3.1), (3.2)

1. Tag objects as “invalid” if they cause an exception when being transformed,
   but don’t fail the entire migration. 
2. Log an error message informing administrators that there are invalid
   objects which require inspection. For each invalid object, provide an error
   stack trace to aid in debugging. 
3. Administrators should be able to generate a migration report (similar to
   the one dry run migrations create) which is an NDJSON export of all objects
   tagged as “invalid”.

>    1. Expose this as an API first

Author: Yes, I'll clarify the RFC.

| --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| Yes                   | Idempotent migrations performed without coordination      |
| No                    | Single node migrations coordinated through a lease / lock |

Idempotent migrations don't require coordination making the algorithm
significantly less complex and will never require manual intervention to
retry. We, therefore, prefer this solution, even though it introduces
restrictions on migrations (4.3.1.1). For other alternatives that were
considered see section [(5)](#5-alternatives).

## 4.3.1 Idempotent migrations performed without coordination

The migration system can be said to be idempotent if the same results are
produced whether the migration was run once or multiple times. This property
should hold even if new (up to date) writes occur in between migration runs
which introduces the following restrictions:

### 4.3.1.1 Restrictions

1. All document transforms need to be deterministic, that is a document
   transform will always return the same result for the same set of inputs. 
2. It should always be possible to construct the exact set of inputs required

>    for (1) at any point during the migration process (before, during, after). 

Reviewer 3: This is not directly related to this RFC, but I think that some currently unimplemented migration needs (such as splitting a given object into multiple objects during a migration) would violate these restrictions. Not sure if this should be impacting this RFC though.

Author: Thanks for bringing this up, I think it's worth fleshing out how this RFC would impact requested migration features so I'll add it to the RFC. Splitting an object would still be possible, but the new id's need to be generated deterministically.

2. Create `.kibana_n+1`, if it already exists, ignore the error and continue.
3. Migrate documents by reading from `.kibana_n` and creating documents in
   `.kibana_n+1`. If a document already exists, ignore.
4. Move the `.kibana` index to point to `.kibana_n+1` (ignore if it has
   already been moved). 

Together with the limitations this algorithm ensures that migrations are
idempotent. If two nodes are started simultaneously, both of them will start
writing into `.kibana_n+1` but because migrations are idempotent, it doesn’t
matter which node’s writes win.

> Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to
> perform a migration at the same time. E.g. if a v7.8.0 and a v7.9.0 node
> attempts to simultaneously migrate a 7.6.0 index the result will be an
> inconsistent state. This is an unlikely scenario in practise and therefore
> an acceptable limitation. In 8.x we can ensure that only the latest node
> completes the migration. 

## 4.5 Changes in 8.0
1. Migrations will be in-place and re-use the same index for minor and patch
   upgrades. 
2. Only allow breaking field mapping changes (which requires creating a new

>    index) in a major.

Reviewer 3: Would we be able to ensure that technically from `core`, or would that just be documentation / recommendation to migration owners?

Author: I don't think we should try to detect breaking changes but any time a breaking mapping change is applied the migration will fail. So if a plugin doesn't follow this "rule" their migrations will fail as soon as Kibana is restarted after the updated type mapping was registered.

considered see section [(5)](#5-alternatives).

## 4.3.1 Idempotent migrations performed without coordination

The migration system can be said to be idempotent if the same results are
produced whether the migration was run once or multiple times. This property
should hold even if new (up to date) writes occur in between migration runs
which introduces the following restrictions:

### 4.3.1.1 Restrictions

1. All document transforms need to be deterministic, that is a document
   transform will always return the same result for the same set of inputs. 
2. It should always be possible to construct the exact set of inputs required
   for (1) at any point during the migration process (before, during, after). 

Although these restrictions require significant changes, it does not prevent
known upcoming migrations such as [sharing saved-objects in multiple spaces](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/27004) or [splitting a saved
object into multiple child
documents](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/26602). To ensure that
these migrations are idempotent, they will have to generate new saved object
id's deterministically with e.g. UUIDv5.

> ### 4.3.1.2 Algorithm

Author: You're right :( The only solution I can think of is to have tomb stone documents instead of actually deleting the document. For (4.2) we're introducing a status field which could be `status: 'invalid' | 'corrupt'` so we could expand this to include a `'deleted'` status.

(It adds additional complexity to the SavedObjectsRepository to filter these out but it does mean we have an underlying mechanism to implement a "recycling bin". I've seen this feature requested, but not sure if it's something we really want.)

1. On startup, find the index to which the `.kibana` alias points,
   `.kibana_n`, and check if any documents have an outdated `migrationVersion`
   indicating that a migration needs to be performed. 
2. Create `.kibana_n+1`, if it already exists, ignore the error and continue.
3. Migrate documents by reading from `.kibana_n` and creating documents in

>    `.kibana_n+1`. If a document already exists, ignore.

Reviewer 5: Is the migration author supposed to catch and ignore these errors or the migration system? Is there any concern that ignoring this could hide legit errors with id conflicts since users can manually set ids using json imports?

Author: The migration system will catch and handle any errors. We have some existing migrations which catch exceptions and return documents without transforming them, these should be updated to throw these errors.

While we run migration transform functions on imported documents before creating/updating them this doesn't cause a kibana-wide saved object migration. Our current terminology isn't very precise, but we could say that data is always transformed when imported, but we only run a migration when Kibana is upgraded and it finds outdated documents in the saved object indices.

There is a risk here if a migration transformation function changes id's or creates new documents (something we might support in the future). If there is an ID conflict it would go unnoticed leading to silent data loss. The migration to support sharing objects across multiple namespaces will generate new id's, but because it will use UUIDv5 it cannot conflict with any UUIDv4 ID's. Data loss is still theoretically possible if a user created an object with a custom UUIDv5 id that happens to match. I think the risk is small enough to be able to ignore.

We can't prevent this data loss, but we could at least detect it and fail the migration if this happens. To do this we could keep a list of all failed updates because a document already exists. Then once the migration is complete we check if any of the failed documents have an outdated migration version, if they do we fail the migration.

4. Move the `.kibana` index to point to `.kibana_n+1` (ignore if it has
   already been moved). 

Together with the limitations this algorithm ensures that migrations are
idempotent. If two nodes are started simultaneously, both of them will start
writing into `.kibana_n+1` but because migrations are idempotent, it doesn’t
matter which node’s writes win.

> > Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to

Reviewer 6: When the index is first created, we also specify the mappings. If the migration was started by version 7.9, and resumed by version 7.10, the mappings are likely to change and the migration will potentially fail mid-migration.

To mitigate against this mid-migration failure and allow version 7.9 to resume the migration, what if we include the version number in the mappings metadata? When the migrations are on step 2 and we're unable to create the index, we can retrieve the mappings and ensure we're resuming the migrations for the same version. This potentially limits the situations in which we can resume an abandoned or failed migration, while preventing against us resulting in an inconsistent state.

This same logic **could** be applied when we have different plugins. I'm honestly not sure what the result is of multiple instances with different plugins both running the migrations to know whether or not this warrants the same protections.

> > Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to

Author: Yes I think we need to add mappings verification step if step 2 fails to create an index. The mappings metadata contains a hash of all the mappings per saved object type so we already have enough information to know whether the mappings are compatible or not. I agree with you, if they're not compatible we should just fail the migration because another node could be busy migrating and one node failing hard is better than an inconsistent state.

To calculate this "compatibility" the existing system already considers mappings that are defined on the index but not in the known mappings on the node as "compatible". This means if a node with a plugin enabled starts a migration and then later a node with that plugin disabled comes online, it will successfully continue the migration. However the opposite isn't true. If a plugin was disabled when the migration started and then enabled, the later node will consider the mappings as being incompatible.

The mappings of different enabled plugins should always be additive so if we could get the two nodes to synchronize what the union of their mappings should be we could allow the migration to proceed in parallel. But this would require something like optimistic concurrency control on the mappings API to avoid race conditions. Maybe there is a brute force approach where we update the mappings hoping the other node doesn't override our additions and then start migrating objects, if a write fails due to a mappings error we start over, updating the mappings again and again trying write our migrated objects.

> > Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to

Author: This mapping synchronization is also a problem in 8.x when there are mixed versions performing a migration in parallel or nodes on the same version with different enabled plugins.

I don't think this is a very common occurrence, so it feels like failing hard and instructing the user to recover a previous snapshot in order to retry would be acceptable.

> > Note: This algorithm doesn't support mixed Kibana versions attempting to

Author: I've added a mappings compatibility check.

> perform a migration at the same time. E.g. if a v7.8.0 and a v7.9.0 node
> attempts to simultaneously migrate a 7.6.0 index the result will be an

> > inconsistent state. This is an unlikely scenario in practise and therefore

Reviewer 7: > This is an unlikely scenario in practise and therefore an acceptable limitation

This limitation makes sense but I just want to cast a vote for fixing this problem sooner rather than later:

For Observability development we have a GCP machine that ingests gigabytes of data per hour into a centralised cloud-based Elasticsearch instance. To avoid having to run a similar setup locally (very resource and storage intensive) developers connect their local Kibana instance to the shared ES instance.

Currently we have big problems with migrations on developers machines interfering with each other. Especially if a developer downgrades their Kibana instance to run a previous version while still connected to the shared ES instance. I can imagine this is not that uncommon for other Kibana devs.

It sounds like this proposal will alleviate the problems we are seeing so I would love for it to happen before 8.x (which could be years away).
Regardless what timeline you end up with, I love that you are working on improving this 👍 👍

Author: I should probably use 8.0 instead of 8.x, this will probably not change for the entire 8.x, but the idea is to release it as part of 8.0 so at least that brings the timeline closer :)

Reviewer 7: It does! Thanks for the clarification.

> > an acceptable limitation. In 8.x we can ensure that only the latest node

Author: optimistic concurrency control allows us to detect that another node has performed a write. If we get such a write collision, we restart the migration including a check for documents that have a `migrationVersion` that's newer than this node's `kibanaVersion`. 

So in this example, 7.8.0 detects a document with a `migrationVersion: 7.9.0` and fails. 7.9.0 will probably get some write conflicts from 7.8.0 but it will restart it's migration and then successfully migrate the documents on with `migrationVersion: 7.8.0` to `migrationVersion: 7.9.0`.

It's not very efficient, since we end up doing much more read queries. Worst case every kibana node does two read queries for every batch of objects that are migrate (one query for newer documents, one for outdated documents).

> completes the migration. 

## 4.5 Changes in 8.0
1. Migrations will be in-place and re-use the same index for minor and patch
   upgrades. 
2. Only allow breaking field mapping changes (which requires creating a new
   index) in a major.
3. All update operations should use optimistic concurrency control.

### 4.5.1 Migration algorithm (8.0):

1. On startup, find the index to which the `.kibana` alias points,
   `.kibana_n`, and check if any documents have an outdated `migrationVersion`
   indicating that a migration needs to be performed.
2. If there are documents with newer `migrationVersion` numbers, exit Kibana
   with a fatal error.

> 3. If there are outdated documents, migrate these in batches:

Author: TODO: add a step to update the mappings of the index

When two kibana nodes try to update the index to different mappings it's possible that there's a race condition and only one of the node's updates will succeed. This can happen when two nodes are different Kibana versions or have different plugins enabled. This could lead to write failures in step (4), we should catch write failures due to incompatible mappings and fail the migration if this happens.

If there are mixed versions i.e. 8.1 and 8.2 it is possible for 8.1 to win the mappings race, but then fail the migration because it detects the presence of documents migrated to v8.2. Later the 8.2 node's migration could also fail because of incompatible mappings (from 8.1). The next time 8.1 starts up it won't try to update the mappings because it detects 8.2 documents so will fail immediately. This will allow 8.2 to successfully set the mappings and complete the migration.

   1. Read a batch of outdated documents from `.kibana_n`.
   2. Transform documents by applying the migration functions.
   3. Update the document batch in the same index using optimistic concurrency
      control. 

>    4. If a batch fails due to an update version mismatch, repeat the entire

Reviewer 5: In what circumstances would a batch fail? Writes are locked during this period, right? But maybe another node started updating this batch already? But if multiple nodes can run through this, it seems like the second node might hit `2.` because there will now be documents with newer `migrationVersion` numbers?

Author: A batch will fail (with an optimistic concurrency version mismatch) whenever a write has occurred after the batch was read. This can happen in the following scenarios:
 a. an outdated Kibana continues to write to the index (we try to minimize this in 4.5.2, but it's still possible)
 b. another Kibana node of the same version is also performing the migration in parallel
 c. a newer Kibana node is performing the migration

Step (2)'s "newer migrationVersion numbers" refers to documents with `migrationVersion > kibanaVersion` caused by (c). So if we hit scenario (b), we won't fail, we will just check if the migration is complete, and then read a new batch of documents that could be migrated.

  but we cannot detect what kind of failures might occur while creating a new
  index. Whereas retrying migrations will eventually recover from the errors
  in (3.3), re-using an index allows us to detect these problems before trying
  and avoid errors like (3.3.1) altogether.
- Single index to backup instead of “index pattern” that matches any
  `.kibana_n`.
- Simplifies Kibana system index Elasticsearch plugin since it needs to work
  on one index per "tenant".
- Can prevent data loss when mixed versions of Kibana are both attempting a
  migration using optimistic concurrency control.

Drawbacks:
- Cannot make breaking mapping changes (even though it was possible, we have not
  introduced a breaking mapping change during 7.x).
- Rollback is only possible by restoring a snapshot which requires educating
  users to ensure that they don't rely on `.kibana_n` indices as backups.
  (Apart from the need to educate users, snapshot restores provide many
  benefits).
- It narrows the second restriction under (4.3.1) even further: migrations
  cannot rely on any state that could change as part of a migration because we

>   can no longer use the previous index as a snapshot of unmigrated state.

Reviewer 5: Does this mean migrations won't have access to read data from other saved objects? I can't remember the specifics now... but I thought we needed that functionality for some reason.  @timroes you remember?

Author: We can still read other saved objects but they might or might not be migrated already. Whereas we previously had a snapshot that we knew would remain unmigrated forever. So I don't think this will affect https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/34996

Author: Though I have my doubts whether we can support https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/34996 generically. We can probably expose this functionality, but every migration that is written with such a pre-migration state collector will have to be very carefully thought through since the interactions with other migrations that potentially re-write id's make it very hard to reason about the behaviour during the migration and during saved object imports.

So we will probably have to consider these kinds of migrations on a case-by-case basis to really say if it's feasible.

Reviewer 5: Will the API types take this into account so it's obvious that the type might be the latest shape or the shape from the last version? E.g. the saved object getter would return something like `MyObject7_1` | `MyObject7_2`?

I'm worried that this could cause hard to debug issues if not clearly indicated by the API that the type is not guaranteed to be the latest.  Consider:

1. Time T1: Developer of Bar plugin migrates Bar to Bar1, adding property `zed` to Bar1 type.

2. Time T1: Developer of Foo plugin, migrates Foo to Foo1, looks up other saved object, Bar1, to do so, and accesses property `zed`.

Will the API warn Foo developer that Bar1 type might actually _not_ have property `zed` on it?

Reviewer 8: The reason why we discussed this, and that feature would be nice is the embedding in dashboard functionality. Currently we have no way of migrating an dashboard using references for panels to a one where the visualization is stored embedded in the dashboard, because that would require us to load that visualization saved object while migrating the dashboard. The other aspect was removing of the markdown visualization and input controls. We're planning to make them more like "widgets" on the dashboard and not part of visualizations. But to migrate that we'd also need to load an existing visualization object during the dashboard migration to figure out the content of the markdown visualization to convert it to a widget.

I'd say neither of those is at the moment really critical, or rather.. we didn't expect to be able to do either of these. While nice to haves, I wouldn't let that use-case block something else right now.

prevent any writes from outdated nodes. The index-wide building blocks which
Elasticsearch provides such as aliases or read-only indices are located inside
Elasticsearch's ClusterState. But, there are certain failure scenarios under
which ClusterState could remain inconsistent between nodes for an unbounded
amount of time. In addition, any in-progress writes such as a bulk operation
will continue to run even after an index was set to read-only or an alias had
been removed.

Since Elasticsearch doesn't expose the required building blocks, Kibana cannot
guarantee that there would be no data loss. Instead, we aim to minimize it as
much as possible.

To perform a rollback for a failed migration, any "guards" put in place by
newer Kibana nodes will have to be removed. By locating this state in the
backup snapshot taken before an upgrade, rolling back to the previous snapshot
will automatically remove the guard.

1. Disable `action.auto_create_index` for the Kibana system indices.
2. If a node detects that the `.kibana` index requires a migration it does the
   following:
   1. Create a version-specific read and write alias for sending commands

>        (.e.g `.kibana_8.0.1_read` & `.kibana_8.0.1_write`.

Reviewer 6: If migrations are run when plugins are installed/removed, does this affect our use of version-specific aliases?

Author: These version aliases prevent (minimize) the chance of incompatible Kibana versions writing to the index and causing data loss. Two kibana instances on the same version but with different plugins are always compatible because they will write different types. So instance `a` with `pluginA` enabled will write `plugin_a_type` saved objects, but even though instance `b` doesn't know how to migrate the `plugin_a_type` because `pluginA` is disabled, it also will never read / write these objects.

Author: I should collapse these separate read/write alias into a single version-specific alias because we can't provide read-only functionality with in-place migrations so having two aliases serves no purpose.

Author: We only use a single version-specific alias for read/writes now.

> Achieves goals: (2.3)
> Mitigates errors: (3.1), (3.2)

1. Introduce a CLI option to perform a dry run migration to allow
   administrators to locate and fix potential migration failures without
   taking their existing Kibana node(s) offline.
2. To have the highest chance of surfacing potential failures such as low disk
   space, dry run migrations should not be mere simulations. A dry run should
   perform a real migration in a way that doesn’t impact the existing Kibana
   cluster.
3. The CLI should generate a migration report to make it easy to create a
   support request from a failed migration dry run.
    1. The report would be an NDJSON export of all failed objects.
    2. If support receives such a report, we could modify all the objects to
       ensure the migration would pass and send this back to the client.
    3. The client can then import the updated objects using the standard Saved
       Objects NDJSON import and run another dry run to verify all problems
       have been fixed.
4. Make running dry run migrations a required step in the upgrade procedure
   documentation.
5. (Optional) Add dry run migrations to the standard cloud upgrade procedure?

> ## 4.2 Tag objects as “invalid” if their transformation fails

Author: I've given this more thought and this really is a tradeoff between data consistency and availability. When a transform fails we cannot be sure if it was invalid data or a bug in the transform function so we cannot be sure that it is safe to simply ignore this object. Queries on the saved object type might suddenly exclude this object because it wasn't successfully migrated. The impact of this on users vary significantly between plugins so we cannot prefer availability for all plugin types.

It would be useful for plugins to be able to specify the behaviour they prefer, availability or consistency, but this also has problems. If there's a bug in a migration transform and e.g. all dashboards failed to migrate while this type preferred availability, Kibana would start up successfully and accept traffic. A user must now either delete and re-create all dashboards, wait for an emergency bug fix or rollback Kibana. But because Kibana is already serving traffic a rollback will loose data that's impossible to recover.

In such a scenario it would be preferable if the migration failed and the user was immediately able to rollback Kibana to a previous working version. This would mean a failed upgrade but wouldn't cause any downtime outside the scheduled maintenance window.

2. If `.kibana_current` and `.kibana_7.10.0` both exists and are pointing to the same index this version's migration has already been completed.
   1. Because the same version can have plugins enabled at any point in time, perform the mappings update in step (6).
   2. If the target index contains any documents with an outdated migrationVersion number, log an error explaining that a re-migration is required and mark the saved object type these documents belong to as unavailable. See section (4.2.1.4).
   3. Skip to step (9) to start serving traffic.
3. If `.kibana_current` is pointing to an index that belongs to a later version of Kibana .e.g. `.kibana_7.12.0_001` fail the migration.
4. Mark the source index as read-only and wait for all in-flight operations to drain (requires new functionality in Elasticsearch). This prevents any further writes from outdated nodes. Assuming this API is similar to the existing `/<index>/_close` API, we expect to receive `"acknowledged" : true` and `"shards_acknowledged" : true`. If all shards don’t acknowledge within the timeout, retry the operation until it succeeds.

> 5. Clone the source index into a new target index which has writes enabled. All nodes on the same version will use the same fixed index name e.g. `.kibana_7.10.0_001`. The `001` postfix can be changed with the configuration option i.e. `migrations.target_index_postfix: '002'`

Reviewer 2: Can we add detail on the purpose of this postfix? Later we mention that this is useful for rollback procedures but it's not very obvious.

   1. `POST /.kibana_n/_clone/.kibana_7.10.0_001?wait_for_active_shards=all {"settings": {"index.blocks.write": true}}`. Ignore errors if the clone already exists.
   2. Wait for the cloning to complete `GET /_cluster/health/.kibana_7.10.0_001?wait_for_status=green&timeout=60s` If cloning doesn’t complete within the 60s timeout, log a warning for visibility and poll again.

> 6. Update the mappings of the target index

Reviewer 2: Am I right in my understanding that we cannot remove mappings or stop indexing fields with this pattern? In those scenarios, can we still do a regular reindex instead of a clone?

I worry that we may need to remove many mapped fields sooner than later. We are pushing up against the default limit of 1000 indexed fields and I think there are many that do not need to be indexed.

Author: > Am I right in my understanding that we cannot remove mappings or stop indexing fields with this pattern? In those scenarios, can we still do a regular reindex instead of a clone?

Yes, we cannot remove mappings. So if a migration "renames" a field we'll be forever left with the old and new fields which will accelerate the field growth. (We can stop indexing nested fields by setting their type to `object` with `enabled: false` but this always applies to all the children of the disabled parent field so it's a blunt hammer.)

`master` currently sets 408 fields so I think we have quite a bit of headroom at least during 7.x There isn't an easy way to track this, we would have to perform an upgrade through all the bug fix releases to come up with a worst-case count so we should probably add telemetry for this at least in 8.0.

The only way to "reset" the mappings is doing a reindex, it will be slower than a clone, but other than the longer downtime window it won't impact the algorithm. We could look into doing a re-index for every major in order to clean up mappings of unused fields.

Longer term we need consider what we'll do to "scale" beyond 1000 fields. We could either "re-balance" objects across multiple indexes or simply up the field limit in the Elasticsearch system indices plugin for Kibana. I don't fully understand the implications of this tradeoff.

Author: TIL: we can disable a single field from being indexed with `index: no` https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/mapping-index.html

Reviewer 6: Have you been able to change the `index` property of a field from `index: true` to `index: false`? I haven't been able to in my limited testing?

Assuming we aren't able to, that means that any field which was added during any version of Kibana or any plugin of Kibana will be persistent in the `.kibana_${version}` indices whenever the `_clone` is used. Did you have any plans to ensure that for all of 7.x or 8.x that we don't eventually cross this limit, including fields which were left behind by old versions or disabled plugins?

Author: Yeah I should have updated this conversation after my further investigation of our field growth. We can't use `index: false` or `enabled: false` to reduce the field count. So when cloning, fields will always increase on every release.

So we basically have a tradeoff between migration performance for huge indices and containing the field growth. As of now, there are no concrete plans for any plugins who want to store > 100k objects or gigabytes of data. So I think as a first step we should rather contain the field growth.

I created https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/70471 for scaling field count and want to leave it out of the scope of this RFC. But I think the long term solution to migration performance for huge indices and scaling field count will be the same: use more independent indices. The more granular the indices the higher the ratio of objects requiring a migration vs objects that don't need to be migrated. So on the far side of the spectrum if we go with an index per saved object type then reindexing performance should be nearly equivalent to cloning and transforming performance.

But stable lock-free migrations will be a pre-requisite.

Reviewer 6: I agree that long-term we should be using more independent granular indices. In the short-term, I just wanted to make sure that we didn't accumulate enough abandoned fields over time that we prevent users who frequently upgrade from upgrading without a reindex.

Would it be possible to increase the `index.mapping.total_fields.limit` based on the fields that we know about to make sure that we don't hit this limit until we're able to partition the indices? Is my understanding correct that given the traditional size of the `.kibana*` indices, if we go over the default limit of 1000 fields, the performance penalty isn't expected to be substantial?

Author: Yes the ES team's gut feeling is that doubling the field count shouldn't have a noticeable performance effect because of `.kibana` having so few documents.

The other alternative is to use a reindex instead of a clone, it would be a bit slower, but then we can remove fields. The only way for a node to check for completion of a reindex operation started by a different node is to use the tasks API which is in beta and it seems like building this kind of functionality on the tasks API is discouraged https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/51628. I've asked the ES team for feedback.

Switching from cloning to reindex should be relatively easy and low risk so it could be done in a future release if we see that the abandoned field count is becoming significant.

Author: Just to close the loop here, feedback from the ES team is that we can use the beta tasks API for checking reindex completion as this is the only API exposing this information at the moment. But we'll use this as an escape hatch if we haven't found better alternatives for scaling the field count.

   1. Retrieve the existing mappings including the `migrationMappingPropertyHashes` metadata.
   2. Update the mappings with `PUT /.kibana_7.10.0_001/_mapping`. The API deeply merges any updates so this won't remove the mappings of any plugins that were enabled in a previous version but are now disabled.
   3. Ensure that fields are correctly indexed using the target index's latest mappings `POST /.kibana_7.10.0_001/_update_by_query?conflicts=proceed`. In the future we could optimize this query by only targeting documents:
      1. That belong to a known saved object type.
      2. Which don't have outdated migrationVersion numbers since these will be transformed anyway.
      3. That belong to a type whose mappings were changed by comparing the `migrationMappingPropertyHashes`. (Metadata, unlike the mappings isn't commutative, so there is a small chance that the metadata hashes do not accurately reflect the latest mappings, however, this will just result in an less efficient query).
7. Transform documents by reading batches from the source index then transforming and updating them with optimistic concurrency control.
   1. Ignore any version conflict errors.

>    2. If a document transform fails mark the saved object type as unavailable but continue trying to transform other documents of the same type.

Reviewer 2: Is this the same as marking objects as invalid? Should we remove this?

The proposed design makes several important assumptions and tradeoffs.

**Background:**

The 7.x upgrade documentation lists taking an Elacsearch snapshot as a
required step, but we instruct users to retry migrations and perform rollbacks
by deleting the failed `.kibana_n` index and pointing the `.kibana` alias to
`.kibana_n-1`:
 - [Handling errors during saved object
migrations.](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/75444a9f1879c5702f9f2b8ad4a70a3a0e75871d/docs/setup/upgrade/upgrade-migrations.asciidoc#handling-errors-during-saved-object-migrations)
 - [Rolling back to a previous version of Kibana.](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/75444a9f1879c5702f9f2b8ad4a70a3a0e75871d/docs/setup/upgrade/upgrade-migrations.asciidoc#rolling-back-to-a-previous-version-of-kib) 
 - Server logs from failed migrations.

**Assumptions and tradeoffs:**
1. The simplicity of idempotent, coordination-free migrations outweighs the
   restrictions this will impose on the kinds of migrations we're able to
   support in the future. See (4.2.1)
2. Maintaining the upgrade behaviour and rollback procedures of previous
   Kibana 7.x releases is more important than introducing enhancements like:

>    1. (2.6) _mixed Kibana versions shouldn't cause data loss_.

Reviewer 6: Is my understanding correct that the data loss occurs because after these changes all instances of Kibana will use `.kibana_${version}` for normal saved-object operations, so old versions will continue writing to the old indices after a new instance comes online?

Author: Although the tradeoff is probably still valid, it's misleading since the updated algorithm managed to achieve both: we can prevent data loss for mixed versions AND we still have a backup `.kibana_n` / `.kibana_${version}` index.

We won't have data-loss in your example because we set the source index to read-only. So the outdated node will probably behave in unexpected ways, but it won't acknowledge writes that don't succeed.

Reviewer 6: Cool, even better!

object into multiple child
documents](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/26602). To ensure that
these migrations are idempotent, they will have to generate new saved object
id's deterministically with e.g. UUIDv5.

### 4.2.1.2 Migration algorithm: Cloned index per version
Note:
- The description below assumes the migration algorithm is released in 7.10.0.
  So < 7.10.0 will use `.kibana` and >= 7.10.0 will use `.kibana_current`.
- We refer to the alias and index that outdated nodes use as the source alias
  and source index.
- Every version performs a migration even if mappings or documents aren't outdated.

1. Locate the source index by fetching aliases (including `.kibana` for versions prior to v7.10.0) `GET '/_alias/.kibana_current,.kibana_7.10.0,.kibana'`. The source index is the index the `.kibana_current` alias points to, or if it doesn’t exist, the index the `.kibana` alias points to.
2. If `.kibana_current` and `.kibana_7.10.0` both exists and are pointing to the same index this version's migration has already been completed.
   1. Because the same version can have plugins enabled at any point in time, perform the mappings update in step (6).

>    3. Skip to step (9) to start serving traffic.

Author: I think it's worth logging a warning on every startup if there's unknown saved objects, but if we prevent startup then you can't temporarily disable a plugin to debug or mitigate some production issue.

3. Fail the migration if:
   1. `.kibana_current` is pointing to an index that belongs to a later version of Kibana .e.g. `.kibana_7.12.0_001`

>    2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).

Author: I agree that this could be seen as a breaking change. But once a version upgrade has completed with unknown types it will introduce downtime and is quite complicated to fix (see 4.2.1.4.1 "perform a re-migration").

In contrast, failing to start a migration won't introduce downtime or difficult to recover from scenarios. 

To reduce any upgrade friction so that users don't get stuck on an old version because of this new behaviour we could introduce a runtime flag that will delete any unknown types from the target index. That means that using the flag will preserve the unknown types in the "backup" source index but these won't cause any problems like increasing the field count or users accidentally starting a migration without all the necessary plugins enabled. 

What do you think?

>    2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).

Reviewer 6: I think it's going to be hard to argue for the originally proposed behavior to not be considered a breaking change. This situation doesn't only occur when a plugin is disabled, but also when a third-party plugin was uninstalled after creating a saved-object.

> To reduce any upgrade friction so that users don't get stuck on an old version because of this new behaviour we could introduce a runtime flag that will delete any unknown types from the target index. That means that using the flag will preserve the unknown types in the "backup" source index but these won't cause any problems like increasing the field count or users accidentally starting a migration without all the necessary plugins enabled.

I definitely think this would make it easier for a user to recover from this situation, but if the user has to manually specify the runtime flag, it'll still be considered a breaking change. I also don't think we should default to this behavior within 7.x because it could create a really poor user experience (which could be argued is a breaking change, but I don't think it's clear) if they were to perform the spaces example in section 4.2.1.4.

One potential solution which isn't mentioned in section 4.2.1.4 is to include a hash of all of the installed plugins in the name of the actual ES index. Ostensibly, this seems like it'd allow us to perform a migration whenever plugins are installed/uninstalled or enabled/disabled. Are there intricacies to this solution that I'm overlooking?

>    2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).

Author: Performing a migration on every enable/disable solves our problems, but the downside is it causes downtime for all nodes in the cluster. This shouldn't happen often and the downtime should usually be very minimal (probably only the time it takes to make a clone). But this could also be seen as a breaking change since currently a plugin could be enabled/disabled as a rolling configuration change while all nodes are online, but with this change the source index will be marked as read-only disabling writes from other nodes.

I'm also not immediately sure how we'll handle enabling, then disabling and enabling again on the same version. Either way I think it's worth adding this option to the RFC and fleshing it out.

>    2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).

Author: In 4.2.1.2 we have:
> 2. If `.kibana_current` and `.kibana_7.10.0` both exists and are pointing to the same index this version's migration has already been completed.
>    1. Because the same version can have plugins enabled at any point in time, perform the mappings update in step (6).
>    2. Skip to step (9) to start serving traffic.

I think we could perform step (7) which transforms outdated documents here too before starting to serve traffic and can't immediately think of any big downsides.

This still has the downside that we could run into future problems with incompatible mappings, but seems like a good solution for 7.x.

I've updated the RFC with these alternatives and new recommendation.

>    2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).

Reviewer 6: > I think we could perform step (7) which transforms outdated documents here too before starting to serve traffic and can't immediately think of any big downsides.

This seems reasonable to me.

2. If `.kibana_current` and `.kibana_7.10.0` both exists and are pointing to the same index this version's migration has already been completed.
   1. Because the same version can have plugins enabled at any point in time, perform the mappings update in step (6).
   2. Skip to step (9) to start serving traffic.
3. Fail the migration if:
   1. `.kibana_current` is pointing to an index that belongs to a later version of Kibana .e.g. `.kibana_7.12.0_001`
   2. The source index contains documents that belong to an unknown Saved Object type (from a disabled plugin). Log an error explaining that the plugin that created these documents needs to be enabled again or that these objects should be deleted. See section (4.2.1.4).
4. Mark the source index as read-only and wait for all in-flight operations to drain (requires https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/58094). This prevents any further writes from outdated nodes. Assuming this API is similar to the existing `/<index>/_close` API, we expect to receive `"acknowledged" : true` and `"shards_acknowledged" : true`. If all shards don’t acknowledge within the timeout, retry the operation until it succeeds.

> 5. Clone the source index into a new target index which has writes enabled. All nodes on the same version will use the same fixed index name e.g. `.kibana_7.10.0_001`. The `001` postfix isn't used by Kibana, but allows for re-indexing an index should this be required by an Elasticsearch upgrade. E.g. re-index `.kibana_7.10.0_001` into `.kibana_7.10.0_002` and point the `.kibana_7.10.0` alias to `.kibana_7.10.0_002`.

Reviewer 6: As far as I'm aware, cloning indices in Cloud will not use hard-links until https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/61145 is implemented, so we'll be consuming excess disk space in the meantime.

Author: I wasn't aware of that limitation 😭 

We don't have any data on the size of Kibana indices, although we could collect some from 7.10 as part of https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/56762

We have always created duplicate indices, so cloning without hard-link support will be similar to what we have today. The difference is that today Kibana typically migrates in minors but not in bug fix releases whereas the proposed algorithm will create a new index for every bug fix too. However, users with large kibana indices would have always had to monitor and clean up their indices, so even though this might accelerate it it shouldn't be totally unexpected that Kibana requires more disk space after an upgrade.

I'm also following-up with Cloud/ES as it seems like it might be a quick fix to get hard-link support.

But I'm leaning towards just continuing with the current design. Operationally having an index per version makes it very easy to delete old indices without making any mistakes, so even if it takes up more data it's easier and safer to clear up that data.

Reviewer 6: > We have always created duplicate indices, so cloning without hard-link support will be similar to what we have today. The difference is that today Kibana typically migrates in minors but not in bug fix releases whereas the proposed algorithm will create a new index for every bug fix too. However, users with large kibana indices would have always had to monitor and clean up their indices, so even though this might accelerate it it shouldn't be totally unexpected that Kibana requires more disk space after an upgrade.

> I'm also following-up with Cloud/ES as it seems like it might be a quick fix to get hard-link support.

> But I'm leaning towards just continuing with the current design. Operationally having an index per version makes it very easy to delete old indices without making any mistakes, so even if it takes up more data it's easier and safer to clear up that data.

Seems reasonable to me. If we don't plan on fixing this in Cloud for a super long time, it potentially becomes a larger issues. But, as long as we fix in the next few minors, the impact seems negligible.

1. Locate the source index by fetching aliases (including `.kibana` for versions prior to v7.10.0) `GET '/_alias/.kibana_current,.kibana_7.10.0,.kibana'`. The source index is the index the `.kibana_current` alias points to, or if it doesn’t exist, the index the `.kibana` alias points to.
2. If `.kibana_current` and `.kibana_7.10.0` both exists and are pointing to the same index this version's migration has already been completed.
   1. Because the same version can have plugins enabled at any point in time, perform the mappings update in step (6).

>    2. If the target index contains any documents with an outdated migrationVersion number, log an error explaining that a re-migration is required and mark the saved object type these documents belong to as unavailable. See section (4.2.1.4).

Reviewer 2: Would this also have the same consistency problems that tagging invalid objects has? Maybe it doesn't matter as much since these docs came from an old node.

EDIT: after reading the algo below, it's not immediately obvious how this situation could arise at all?

Author: This can happen when e.g.
1. 7.6.0 with spaces=enabled creates a default space document
2. User disables spaces plugin
3. User upgrades to 7.10.0 OSS (OSS has spaces=disabled so we don't migrate any spaces documents). 7.10.0 includes a migration for spaces documents
4. User notices their mistake and starts using 7.10.0 with x-pack and the spaces plugin enabled. The migration algorithm notices there's a spaces document with migrationVersion=7.6.0 instead of 7.10.0.

This does have a similar problem to tagging invalid objects in that if you accidentally had a plugin disabled like in the situation above you cannot rollback anymore you must re-migrate. If your re-migration fails you're stuck.

Author: I've updated 4.2.1.4 with this example and also changed the preferred way for dealing with orphan documents to prevent the data loss rollback scenario.

   3. Skip to step (9) to start serving traffic.
3. If `.kibana_current` is pointing to an index that belongs to a later version of Kibana .e.g. `.kibana_7.12.0_001` fail the migration.

> 4. Mark the source index as read-only and wait for all in-flight operations to drain (requires new functionality in Elasticsearch). This prevents any further writes from outdated nodes. Assuming this API is similar to the existing `/<index>/_close` API, we expect to receive `"acknowledged" : true` and `"shards_acknowledged" : true`. If all shards don’t acknowledge within the timeout, retry the operation until it succeeds.

Reviewer 2: Can we link to any existing issues or PRs in ES for this?
